# 13_Debugging

### Intro:

- Debugging is at the core of programming
- Day to day life of programmer is spent stuck on a problem
    - Majority of time is spent analyzing and understanding a problem
    - Experimenting or coming up with an approach
    - Or debugging bugs in code
- Have to be patient and logical
- Reading error messages
    - When you run an error you are hit with a wall of txt that looks like gibberish
        - That is called the ************************stack trace************************ and is critical in helping you figure out where to start debugging
        - Carefully learn how to read the ************************stack trace************************
        - Embedded within the stack trace is the error message.
- Now that you’ve found the error message
    - study it and try to walk backwards through the code to understand how the flow of the program arrived at the error condition.
    - Think about various data that is being used at the point of the error and how missing or incorrect data could have caused the problem.
    - Then use a search engine to look up the error message.
        - Don’t use any specific terms for your computer or program in the search engine just use the base error message
    - Filter out search results with prefacing your search with **********Ruby********** that way you can see the results for the Ruby language.
- Stack Overflow
    - [Stack Overflow](http://stackoverflow.com/)
    - This is a great resources, and sometimes worth searching on directly
- Consult Ruby Docs
    - [Ruby Docs](http://ruby-doc.org/)
    - Make sure you are looking at the documentation for ********pure Ruby******** not a library or framework specific documentation.

### Steps to Debugging:

1. Reproduce the Error
    1. You need a deterministic way to consistently reproduce the problem, and only then can you start to isolate the root cause 
    2. Programming joke of “works on my machine” bc they can’t reproduce an error that occurs in the production environment 
2. Determine the Boundaries of the Error 
    1. Once you can reproduce the problem now you need to tweak the data that caused the error
    2. How does modifying the data affect the program behavior?
    3. Do we get expected errors, or does a new error occur that sheds light of the underlying problem? 
3. Trace the Code
    1. Once you understand the boundaries of the problem its time to trace the code
    2. Go through the code from the start and piece together what is happening and where the error in the code is originating from. 
    3. ******************************************trapping the error****************************************** = figuring out where the bug in the code originates from 
4. Understand the problem well
    1. Lets say you have narrowed the source of the bug to a specific method. 
        1. Now you need to break down the code within that method.
        2. Here’s and example where we know the error originates from the `model` method.  
            
            ```ruby
            def car(new_car)
              make = make(new_car)
              model = model(new_car)
              [make, model]
            end
            
            def make(new_car)
              new_car.split(" ")[0]
            end
            
            def model(new_car)
              new_car.split(" ")[2]
            end
            
            make, model = car("Ford Mustang")
            make == "Ford"         # => true
            model.start_with?("M") # => NoMethodError: undefined method `start_with?' for nil:NilClass
            ```
            
        3. now lets breakdown the code in the method 
        4. we know the return value of this method is always nil 
        5. so next we’ll inspect each return value in order to pinpoint the source of the unexpected return value 
        
        ```ruby
        def model(new_car)
          new_car # => "Ford Mustang"
        end
        ```
        
        - That’s the expected return value of `new_car`
        
        ```ruby
        def model(new_car)
          new_car.split(" ") # => ["Ford", "Mustang"]
        end
        ```
        
        - The return value here is an array, which is expected based on how the `#split` method works.
        
        ```ruby
        def model(new_car)
          new_car.split(" ")[2] # => nil
        end
        ```
        
        - The unexpected return value here is the result of calling `[2]` on the `["Ford", "Mustang"]` array.
        - The return value is `nil` bc there is no element at index `2` in this array.
        - Since arrays have a zero-based index, we need to call `[1]` in order to return `"Mustang"` from the array.
        
        ```ruby
        def model(new_car)
          new_car.split(" ")[1] # => "Mustang"
        end
        ```
        
5. Implement a Fix
    1. There are usually multiple ways to fix an error with multiple layers to the problem. 
    2. For example we could suppress the error from being thrown with this code 
    
    ```ruby
    model.start_with?("M") rescue false # => false
    ```
    
     c. but we still have the original error in the `model` method though
    
     d. in some cases you’ll be using a library or code that you can’t modify 
    
    1. in those situations you have no choice but to deal with teh edge cases in your own code 
    2. for this example we can fix the offending code in the `model` method. 
    
     e. Always fix one problem at a time 
    
6. Test the Fix
    1. Make sure to always verify that the code fixed the problem by using a similar set of tests from step 2
    2. You’ll also want to add an additional automated test to prevent regression. 

### Techniques for Debugging:

- Go line by line, word by word, and character by character
- [Rubber Duck Debugging](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rubber_duck_debugging)
    - Idea is when you are able to explain the problem to even a rubber duck you are actually allowing yourself to articulate the problem, detail by detail.
- Walking away
    - literally go for a walk (shower, swim, jog, etc.)
    - This is only effective if you first load the problem in your brain
- Using ****Pry****
    - [Pry](https://pry.github.io/) is a powerful Ruby REPL that can replace IRB
    - You can install it like any other gem
        - `$ gem install pry`
    - In order to use Pry we have to require it using `require "pry"`
        - once we have required Pry we can then insert `binding.pry` anywhere in our code and when Ruby gets to that line, execution will stop and we’ll be able to inspect the state of our program at that point
        
        ```ruby
        require "pry" # add this to use Pry
        
        counter = 0
        
        loop do
          counter += 1
          break if counter == 1
          binding.pry
        end
        ```
        
        - In the above code `binding.pry` will never be reached bc the `break` condition evaluates as true if `counter` equals 1.
        - Since we increment `counter` before this condition, `counter` is 1 by the time `break` is executed.
        - Ruby will break out of loop before it reaches line 8 so `binding.pry` will not be executed
    - Let’s change the condition to read `counter == 5` and move `binding.pry` to the line before the `break` condition.
        
        ```ruby
        require "pry" # add this to use Pry
        
        counter = 0
        
        loop do
          counter += 1
          binding.pry # execution will stop here
          break if counter == 5
        end
        ```
        
        - This time Pry stops the execution at the line where `binding.pry`  is declared and gives us a prompt where we can type in an expression and see what the return value is in the terminal.
        - You can also change variable values too in Pry.
        - ********Pry******** is a great way to systematically debug our program w/out putting a bunch of `puts` in our program.
        - It will look something like this
        
        ```ruby
        $ ruby count.rb
        
        From: /Users/temp/count.rb @ line 7 :
        
            2:
            3: counter = 0
            4:
            5: loop do
            6:   counter += 1
         => 7:   binding.pry # execution will stop here
            8:   break if counter == 5
            9: end
        
        [1] pry(main)> counter
        => 1
        [2] pry(main)>
        ```
        
        - In order to continue execution of the program press `Ctrl + D`
        - We are in a loop here so the loop will continue to iterate until counter equals 5
            - this means `binding.pry` will execute on every iteration until we break out of the loop.
            - We could press `Ctrl + D` every time Pry opens a session or…
        - We can exit the program by entering `exit-program`
        
        ```ruby
        $ ruby count.rb
        
        From: /Users/temp/count.rb @ line 7 :
        
            2:
            3: counter = 0
            4:
            5: loop do
            6:   counter += 1
         => 7:   binding.pry # execution will stop here
            8:   break if counter == 5
            9: end
        
        [1] pry(main)> exit-program
        $
        ```
        
- Using a Debugger